The Quiet Crisis unfolding in Software Development
About Me
I’ve been working in software development for twenty-eight years. My current position is Senior Development Director at a software consulting company in Austin, Texas, a position I’ve held for just over six years.
My progression was originally technical in nature — I started out as an Associate Programmer Analyst fresh out of college. Back in those days one of my favorite hobbies was making fun of the stupidity of management. Only much later did I discover I had an aptitude for management — and actually enjoyed it.
The universe employs a cruel kind of karma.
In my current position as Senior Development Director there are six Development Managers that report to me. There are just under fifty software developers in my organization. We have enviably low employee turnover and very high customer satisfaction.
Over the years I’vork at work and home at home aren’t worthy contributors — but pay special attention to those software developers who think they might know of a better way to implement something or might have thought of a feature your customers will love.
Let Employees Leave
If an employee approaches you and asks to leave the group for another group graciously allow them to do so. This doesn’t mean you have to let them leave in the middle of crunch time but as a general rule if they want to leave the group something isn’t working out for them and you should let them transfer even if they haven’t been in the group very long — say, less than one year.
Forcing employees to remain in your group can never lead anywhere good. It’ll impact their morale which impacts the morale of the entire group. It’s also likely they’ll become less effective and in extreme circumstances simply leave the company. Any manager that doesn’t allow their employees to leave has completely misunderstood how to produce the best possible balance of happiness and productivity in their employees and is a rookie mistake I’ve seen even experienced managers make far too often.
Never Turn Down Small Requests
Does your employee want a bigger monitor? Buy them one. Do they want a certain keyboard? Buy them one. Do they want to work from home every other Wednesday to accommodate a personal requirement? Let them. Do they want a Mac instead of a PC? Give it to them.
Unless they have a constant stream of requests that never seems to end you should never say no with only one exception: if you believe the entire team will then want the same small request and it really will impact the budget too much.
When compared to their salary and benefits these little requests go a long way toward keeping morale and thus productivity high and they cost peanuts. If you don’t have the budget for these kinds of small requests it’s time to start looking for work at another company because mid- and upper-level management is broken. If you’ve turned down anything small recently go back to your employee and tell them you’ve reconsidered and give them their small request.
Abolish Yearly and Bi-Yearly Performance Reviews
Your employees should never wait six to twelve months to discover what you feel they’ve excelled at and what they need to work on. Communication between managers and employees should be like a river that never stops flowing. Too many companies are still stuck in the past with their harmful and counterproductive periodic performance reviews. Some performance reviews even require peer ratings which is a recipe for employees to secretly engage in ensuring each other good reviews — or employees that don’t like each other blasting each other. In either case the results are less than useful and typically actively harmful.
This manager/employee communication should not take place during artificially forced periodic one-on-one meetings — often done weekly or semi-weekly — which are usually an uncomfortable requirement for both managers and employees when there’s nothing that needs to be discussed. Both managers and employees should feel relatively comfortable approaching each other when communication is deemed necessary. If an employee is extremely uncomfortable initiating communication with their manager or vice-versa it’s indicative of a bigger problem.
You’re Not Better than Your Employees
Software development is a job. Software development management is a job. Just because your employees report to you doesn’t imply you’re somehow smarter or better. A lot of software developers — dare I say most software developers — just plain love being software developers. Don’t you confuse and don’t let your software developers confuse management as career progression — it’s just a different job even if it generally pays a bit more.
One of the worst things you could ever overhear an employee say is that their career is stalled because they haven’t landed a promotion to management. There’s nothing wrong with a lifelong career that keeps your brain engaged in a positive way and software development remains an outstanding career. Developers should want to get into management for only one reason — because that’s what they want to do, not because it’s considered a step up.
Don’t Discount Younger or Older Developers
Younger employees really do have more energy which improves productivity. Older employees really do have more experience and wisdom which improves productivity. Build a team with diversity in age and watch them blossom into something more than the sum of their parts.
All ages have an important role to play and the best developer teams I’ve worked with have invariably had people of all age ranges — from their twenties to those approaching retirement age. They complement each other extremely well. The synergy is hard to explain but easy to see from a management perspective. In other words don’t let age play a role in your hiring process and you and your employees will benefit in the end.
Don’t have Stupid Dress Codes
As a manager it’s likely you don’t have a whole lot of say here but if you do, allow your employees to dress casually. You certainly don’t want them going to work with torn up jeans or in their pajamas, but a nice pair of jeans and any decent shirt with a collar should do just fine.
By now humanity has learned that over-the-top dress codes don’t improve productivity or company success. And certainly the only men left wearing neckties should be bankers or lawyers. Okay, I’m kidding about that last part — a little. Let your employees be comfortable. For some of them that’s jeans and a basic collared shirt and for others it’s business casual. They’re adults and you should let them decide.